A force of 10 million Newton's is expressed numerically as 10,000 kN.

The SI unit of energy is the Joule (J).

The heat required to change a liquid to a gas is called the heat of vapourisation.

An atom with 3 free electrons is said to be trivalent.

The specific gravity of a substance is calculated by the density of the body divided by the density of water.

The most common refrigerants are ammonia, freon, methyl bromide.

In fibreoptics the type of cable is chosen by matching the diameter of the cable to the wavelength.

What is the kinetic energy of an aircraft of mass of 2 metric tonnes and has a velocity of 2m/s? 4 kJ.

What is the mass number of an element? Number of neutrons and protons.

What is the momentum of a ball of mass 2 grams and has a velocity of 10cm/s? 0.0002 kgm/s.

What do you get when you add 2H2 and O2? 2H2O.

A time period of 10 microseconds is equal to a frequency of 100 kHz.

When heat flows from a hot area to a cold area it is called conduction.

The specific heat capacity of a gas heated at constant pressure, when compared to the specific heat capacity of a gas heated at constant volume, is more.

A gyroscope suffers from apparent wander. This is due to the earth's rotation.

The splitting of a chemical compound is called analysis.

The quadrature component of a vector is 90° to the original.

1 Newton is equal to 1 kilogram meter per second per second.

1 degree rise on the centigrade scale will cause a 1.8 degree rise in Fahrenheit.

Adiabatic compression is when no heat is lost or gained.

The 3rd vector you get when you add 2 vectors together is called the resultant.

The atomic number of an element is the number of protons in the atom.

An atom with 5 free electrons is said to be pentavalent.

The heat required to change a solid to a liquid is called the heat of fusion.

The SI unit of mass is the kilogram (kg).

The SI unit of acceleration is the metre per second squared (m/s²).

The SI unit of density is the kilogram per cubic metre (kg/m³).

Latent heat is the heat required to change the state of a body.

1 Calorie is equal to 4 J.

1 BTU equals 1055 Joules.

The intensity of radiated heat is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the source of the heat.

As a block of ice is melted (to 4°C), its volume decreases.

A material with a gradually varying refractive index is said to have a graded index.

A slug is a unit of mass.

If an object in air is submerged in a liquid or a gas, its weight will decrease.

As an object slides down a slope, its kinetic energy increases and its potential energy decreases.

If a body starts at rest and reaches 84 m/s in 3 seconds, its acceleration is 28 m/s².

The speed of sound in air at 0°C is approximately 331 m/s.

If a material is loaded excessively and is permanently deformed, it is said to be strained.

The height of water required to produce a head pressure of 1 bar is 10.19 m.

The SI unit of pressure is the:
Answer: b) Newtons per metre squared (N/m2)

The SI unit of force is the:
Answer: a) Newton (N)

The SI unit of velocity is the:
Answer: a) metre per second (m/s)

The SI unit of momentum is the:
Answer: a) kilogram metre per second

The formula for calculating stress is:
Answer: b) load divided by cross sectional area

A gauge indicates 15 PSIG. What is the absolute pressure?
Answer: c) 30 PSI

Fibre optic cables are capable of transmitting light at:
Answer: a) 3 x 10^8 m/s

Step index fibres suffer from:
Answer: a) dispersion

Attenuated pulses have their sizes and shape restored by:
Answer: a) regenerators

Attenuation in fibre optic cables is caused by:
Answer: b) absorption and scattering

If a wave traveling to a point meets a wave traveling from that point, of equal frequency:
Answer: a) a standing wave is formed

For a concave lens, the image is:
Answer: c) virtual

What shape is a venturi tube?
Answer: a) Gradually tapering to a minimum cross sectional area

If a fluid moves slowly, it has:
Answer: a) high viscosity

In a fibre optic flying control system:
Answer: b) the sensor and the transmitter require electrical power

Photons in a semiconductor are stimulated to produce excess photons to be emitted. This is a:
Answer: c) laser diode

In a fibre optic flying control system, which of the following are used:
Answer: b) single mode

A fibre optic cable is attenuated at 29 dB/metre. This is referring to:
Answer: c) the maximum cable run allowed in the system

The fibre optic receiver is a:
Answer: a) photodiode

Regenerators are used in fibre optic systems to reduce:
Answer: b) attenuation

An atom consists of:
Answer: c) protons, neutrons, and electrons

The maximum number of electrons in the inner shell of an atom is:
Answer: a) 2

A good refrigerant has:
Answer: c) low condensing pressure, high evaporating temperature

Stress is given by:
Answer: b) force per unit area

An object accelerating down a slope would gain kinetic energy:
Answer: a) equal to the potential energy lost

Quality of sound depends upon:
Answer: c) frequency and harmonics of the waves being produced

Temperature is a measure of:
Answer: b) the amount of vibration of particles

The first overtone of a sound wave is the 2nd harmonic.

Oxygen has a valency of 2.

A process where volume does not change is isochoric.

A process where heat is not transferred to or from a gas is adiabatic.

A varying refractive index is a graded index.

The further from the nucleus the shells are in an atom, the closer the shells get to each other.

What determines an element's identity? The number of protons.

An isotope of an element will have more neutrons.

Refractive index is the speed of light in air divided by the speed of light in the medium.

The smallest part of an element is an atom.

A process where pressure does not change is known as isobaric.

The extension of a spring can be determined using Hooke's Law.

The nucleus of an atom contains protons and neutrons.

The speed of light in km/s is 300,000.

Relative density is density of medium/density of water.

The boundary layer is the layer of still air (due to friction) around the aircraft skin.

Atomic mass is the number of protons plus the number of neutrons.

An aircraft flies 1350 nmiles in 2h 15mins. The average speed is 600 nmiles/hour.

A spring extends 7 cm to the ground and back again 20 times a minute. The period is 3 seconds.

A tone which is 4 times the amplitude is the 2nd harmonic.

A cyclist goes from rest to 50 m/s in 5 seconds. The average acceleration is 10 m/s2.

The form of heat used to turn a solid into a liquid is heat of fusion.

When a steel bar is overstressed, the point at which it does not return to its original form after the load is released is the yield point.

When a liquid is heated, it expands more than a solid.

If pressure on a liquid increases, whilst temperature is held constant, the volume will decrease.

1 BTU is 1055 joules per kilogram.

A compressor increases kinetic energy.

P1 x V1 / T1 = P1 x V2 / T2 is the ideal gas law.

V1 / T1 = V2 / T2 at a constant pressure is Charles' law.

P1 x V1 = P2 x V2 at a constant temperature is Boyle's law.

Change from solid to gas state without going through liquid state is called sublimation.

1 CHU = Centigrade Heat Unit = 1400 ft lbs = energy to raise 1 lb of water by 1° F.

1 BTU = 778 ft lbs to raise = 1 lb of water to heat up by 1° F.

1 HP = 33000 ft lbs / min or 500 ft lbs / s or 746 Watts.

1 Watt = 1 Joule/s.

Temperature change -1.98°C per 1000 ft up to 36,000 ft where it remains constant at -56°C.

A freely falling body, falling from a height of 2km, and assuming g = 10m/s², will strike the ground in a time of 20s.

The angular velocity of a shaft rotating at 300rpm in radians/second is 10pi radians/second.

If a machine has a mechanical advantage of 10 and a velocity ratio of 20, the efficiency of the machine is 0.5.

The force that acts on a body to cause it to rotate in a circular path is called the centripetal force.

A temperature of 41 degrees Fahrenheit in Centigrade is 5 degrees.

Heat is defined as energy in transit.

An aircraft of 2 metric tonnes uses 800 kiloJoules kinetic energy to make an emergency stop. Its brakes apply a force of 10 kiloNewtons. The distance it travels before it comes to a stop is 80m.

The smallest particle of matter that can exist in nature is an atom.

A positive ion has missing electrons.

Radiant heat does not heat up the intervening medium.

Young's modulus is stress / strain.

The isotope of a carbon atom C14 to C12 will have the same numbers of protons.

If an atom has 2 protons, it will have 2 electrons.

1kg of water is heated from 0°C to 2°C. Its volume decreases.

A fire engine is approaching you with its siren on. As it passes you, its pitch decreases.