vocabulary:
atoll, thermal expansion, sea levels, emerge, grow crops, soil, geological makeup, import, home-grown food, groundwater, drought, emergency shipment, forefathers, inevitable, draw up, outline.

reported speech:
- converting direct speech to reported speech
- converting reported speech to direct speech

examples:
d(direct speech), r(reported speech)

d("I want to join Greenpeace," Ben said)
r(Ben said (that) he wanted to join Greenpeace

d("I'm watching a video on deforestation," Ian said to me)
r(Ian told me (that) he was watching a video on deforestation)

d("I've put the recyclables in the bin," Tom said)
r(Tom said (that) he had put the recyclables in the bin.)

d("The forest burnt down last year," Adam told us)
r(Adam told us (that) the forest had burnt down the year before.)

d("They were trying to save a beached whale," Lyn said.)
r(Lyn said (that) they had been trying to save a beached whale.)

d("I'll donate my salary to charity," Peter told me.)
r(Peter told me (that) he would donate his salary to charity.)

d("I can help you with your project," Frank said to Lisa)
r(Frank told Lisa (that) he could help her with her project.)


Questions:

d("Are you coming?" he asked me.)
r(He asked me if/whether I was going.)

d("When did she leave?" he asked.)
r(He asked when she had left.)


Commands/Orders:

d("Leave them on my desk," Sue said.)
r(Sue told me to leave them on her desk.)

d("Don't tell anyone," she said to me.)
r(She told me not to tell anyone.)


Reporting modal verbs:
will/would -> would, may -> might, must -> must/had to, can -> could (present)/ would be able to (future)


d(Present simple)(I like hot weather.)
r(Past simple)(She said (that) she liked hot weather.

d(Present continuous)(It's raining)
r(Past continuous)(He said (that) it was raining.)

d(Present perfect)(They have evacuated the city.)
r(Past perfect)(She said (that) they had evacuated the city.)

d(Past simple)(We saw the landslide.)
r(Past simple or Past perfect)(She said (that) they saw/had seen the landslide)

d(Past continuous)(I was driving the rescue vehicle)
r(Past continuous or Past Perfect continuous)(She said (that) she was driving / had been driving the rescue vehicle.)

d(Will)(I will donate some money.)
r(Would)(He said (that) he would donate some money.)